The Tower of Babel[a] is an origin myth and parable in the Book of Genesis (chapter 11) meant to explain the existence of different languages and cultures.[1][2][3][4][5]

According to the story, a united human race speaking a single language migrates to Shinar (Lower Mesopotamia),[b] where they agree to build a great city with a tower that would reach the sky. Yahweh, observing these efforts and remarking on humanity's power in unity, confounds their speech so that they can no longer understand each other and scatters them around the world, leaving the city unfinished.

Some modern scholars have associated the Tower of Babel with known historical structures and accounts, particularly from ancient Mesopotamia. The most widely attributed inspiration is Etemenanki, a ziggurat dedicated to the god Marduk in Babylon,[6] which in Hebrew was called Babel.[7] A similar story is also found in the ancient Sumerian legend, Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta, which describes events and locations in southern Mesopotamia.[8] 

The phrase "Tower of Babel" does not appear in Genesis nor elsewhere in the Bible; it is always "the city and the tower"[c] or just "the city".[d] The original derivation of the name Babel, which is the Hebrew name for Babylon, is uncertain. The native Akkadian name of the city was Bāb-ilim, meaning 'gate of God'. However, that form and interpretation itself are now usually thought to derive from Akkadian folk etymology applied to an earlier form of the name, Babilla, of unknown meaning and probably non-Semitic origin.[9][10]

Per the story in Genesis, the city received the name "Babel" from the Hebrew verb bālal,[e] meaning to jumble or to confuse, after Yahweh distorted the common language of humankind.[11] According to Encyclopædia Britannica, this reflects word play due to the Hebrew terms for Babylon and "to confuse" having similar pronunciation.[7]

Height

The Book of Genesis does not specify the tower's height; the phrase "its top in the sky" (11:4) was an idiom for impressive height, rather than implying arrogance.[17]: 37  The Book of Jubilees 10:21 mentions the tower's height as being 5,433 cubits and 2 palms (2,484 m; 8,150 ft; 1.54 mi), about three times the height of Burj Khalifa.

The apocryphal Third Apocalypse of Baruch mentions that the "tower of strife" reached a height of 463 cubits (211.8 m; 695 ft), taller than any structure built in human history until the construction of the Eiffel Tower in 1889, which is 324 metres (1,060 ft) in height.

Gregory of Tours writing c. 594, quotes the earlier historian Orosius (c. 417) as saying the tower was "laid out foursquare on a very level plain. Its wall, made of baked brick cemented with pitch" is 50 cubits in width by 200 cubits in length (23 by 91.5 m; 75 by 300 ft), and 470 stades (82.72 km; 51.40 mi) in circumference. A stade was an ancient Greek unit of length, based on the circumference of a typical sports stadium of the time which was about 176 metres (577 ft).[18] The description continues, "Twenty-five gates are situated on each side, which make in all one hundred. The doors of these gates, which are of wonderful size, are cast in bronze. The same historian tells many other tales of this city, and says: 'Although such was the glory of its building still it was conquered and destroyed.'"[19]

A typical medieval account is given by Giovanni Villani (1300): He relates that "it measured eighty miles [130 km] round, and it was already 4,000 paces high [5.92 km; 3.68 mi] and 1,000 paces thick, and each pace is three of our feet."[20] The 14th-century traveler John Mandeville also included an account of the tower and reported that its height had been 64 furlongs (13 km; 8 mi, according to the local inhabitants.

The 17th-century historian Verstegan provides yet another figure – quoting Isidore, he says that the tower was 5,164 paces high (7.6 km; 4.7 mi), and quoting Josephus that the tower was wider than it was high, more like a mountain than a tower. He also quotes unnamed authors who say that the spiral path was so wide that it contained lodgings for workers and animals, and other authors who claim that the path was wide enough to have fields for growing grain for the animals used in the construction.

In his book, Structures: Or Why Things Don't Fall Down, J. E. Gordon considers the height of the Tower of Babel. He wrote, "brick and stone weigh about 120 lb per cubic foot (2,000 kg per cubic metre) and the crushing strength of these materials is generally rather better than 6,000 lbs per square inch or 40 mega-pascals. Elementary arithmetic shows that a tower with parallel walls could have been built to a height of 2.1 km (1.3 mi) before the bricks at the bottom were crushed. However, by making the walls taper towards the top they ... could well have been built to a height where the men of Shinnar would run short of oxygen and had difficulty in breathing before the brick walls crushed beneath their own dead weight." 